# CFDE Cloud Workspace Partnership (CWP) Pilot [NOTE: DRAFT PAGE CONTENT]
## Overview of CWP Pilot
Our goal with the Kids First CFDE “Cloud Workspace Partnership Pilot” is to understand valuable data, tool and research use cases of other CFDE DCCs and collaboratively pilot integration of data and tool usage in the [CAVATICA cloud workspace](https://www.cavatica.org/).  At its core, the pilot is focused on demonstrating the value of a collaborative and interoperable cloud workspace for the CFDE and broader Common Fund community that supports integrated CFDE dataset analysis in the cloud and supports cross DCC use cases that matter to investigators.

During these piloting activities, we aim to provide dedicated support to DCCs and their users, with the goal of not only successfully [demonstrating solutions](https://docs.cavatica.org/docs/collaborating-on-cavatica-a-guide-for-consortia) for specific cloud data accessibility using [GA4GH DRS](https://docs.cavatica.org/docs/import-from-a-drs-server) and [other methods](https://docs.cavatica.org/docs/upload-your-data-to-cavatica) to enable analysis use cases from multiple DCCs, but also improving [training resources](https://docs.cavatica.org/docs/build-a-workflow-tutorial) and [documentation](https://docs.cavatica.org/) to maximize ease of understanding, accessibility and reusability for the Common Fund community in future efforts.

Additionally, in order to empower use case piloting in CAVATICA, members from the DCC user  community can apply for  funding for collaborative pilot projects to offset cloud compute and storage costs. The collaborative projects will also receive support and guidance from the Kids First and CAVATICA Outreach and bioinformatics teams to help meet their goals successfully.

Throughout this process we really would value the feedback and insights we could gain from collaborating teams and individuals on their experience after being introduced to CAVATICA, its range of integration and tooling options, and also hear their feedback on potential areas for improvement to meet the needs of each DCCs user community. Please see below for an announcement message template for your users that can be crafted as you see fit to best communicate the benefits of this “Cloud Workspace Partnership Pilot” to your user community.


## Why Choose Cloud-Based Analysis?
High performance computing necessary for genome-scale analysis requires advanced computer infrastructure. By networking a collection of servers and storage devices, researchers can utilize these machines to carry out the large-scale calculations and computations required for genome alignment and variant calling. High performance computing incurs large upfront costs associated with purchasing equipment as well as ongoing costs associated with staff to maintain this environment and electricity to keep everything running.

Cloud-based computing allows access to this same infrastructure without owning and managing the machines themselves. Rather than purchase the computers themselves, users of cloud computing pay to work in this environment on an amount relative to their usage. Dozens of machines can be activated rapidly when an analysis is beginning - and then shut off just as quickly once the work is complete and they are no longer needed.
CAVATICA provides the service of activating and deactivating these computers when called upon by its users. This allows researchers to focus on the biological and bioinformatic aspects of their project, such as experimental design and analysis, without having to set up cloud infrastructure from scratch.

Data analysis requires genomic files to be in the same location as the software tools that are processing them. The increasing scale and size of genomic data is becoming a burden to moving these files onto an institutional location where the software has been installed. Cloud-based analysis offers an alternative – move the relatively small software files to the location where the data is stored.

Furthermore, cloud computing also allows users to share data seamlessly with collaborators. Any collaborator can create an account and receive access to the same platforms. Useful data products, tools, and results can also be quickly disseminated and shared with the broader research community following publication.

Overall, cloud platforms represent a sustainable alternative to users downloading datasets and carrying out analysis locally. For more information, the [2018 NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science](https://datascience.nih.gov/nih-strategic-plan-data-science) emphasizes the powerful and cost-effective role cloud computing can play in the future of research by streamlining data use, allowing rapid access, and minimizing infrastructure and maintenance costs.
